---
title: "turtile wiki"
author: ["miguel"]
date: 2024-12-05T00:00:00+01:00
lastmod: 2025-01-18T00:00:00+01:00
tags: ["turtile"]
draft: false
---

Links: [turtile]({{< relref "20240707231013-turtile.md" >}})


## Build {#build}


### Dependencies {#dependencies}

-   wayland
-   wayland-protocols
-   wlroots-0.18
-   meson
-   ninja
-   gcc
-   cmake
-   pkg-config
-   libxkbcommon
-   libconfig
-   json-c
-   uuid


### Steps {#steps}


#### 1. Clone the Repository {#1-dot-clone-the-repository}

Start by cloning the project repository:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/migueldeoleiros/turtile.git
cd turtile
```


#### 2. Install Dependencies {#2-dot-install-dependencies}

<!--list-separator-->

-  On Arch Linux:

    Arch Linux typically provides the latest versions directly from its repositories:

    ```shell
    sudo pacman -Syu
    sudo pacman -S meson ninja gcc cmake pkgconf libxkbcommon libconfig json-c wayland wayland-protocols wlroots
    ```

<!--list-separator-->

-  On Ubuntu:

    Ubuntu's repositories may not provide the latest versions of certain libraries. To ensure compatibility, we build some dependencies from source. If you use ubuntu or other debian based distro you can check out the commands in the [CI build](<https://github.com/migueldeoleiros/turtile/blob/master/.github/workflows/main.yml>)


#### 3. Configure the Project with Meson {#3-dot-configure-the-project-with-meson}

Once dependencies are installed, configure the turtile project:

```shell
meson setup build
```


#### 4. Build the Project {#4-dot-build-the-project}

Compile the project:

```shell
meson compile -C build
```

You'll be left with a `turtile` and `ttcli` binaries inside the `build` directory


## Configuration {#configuration}

turtile uses a configuration file written in the [libconfig format ](https://hyperrealm.github.io/libconfig/), which must be explicitly passed to the compositor with the `-c [path/to/config.cfg]` option. This guide explains each configuration option available and provides examples for customization.


### Loading the Configuration {#loading-the-configuration}

To load a configuration file, start the compositor with the -c flag, followed by the path to the configuration file:

```shell
turtile -c path/to/config.cfg
```


### Sample Configuration {#sample-configuration}

The configuration file has several sections that control application behavior, workspace setup, keyboard shortcuts, and appearance.

```cfg
autostart = (
  "kitty",
  "nautilus",
);

workspaces = (
  "main",
  "work",
  "fun",
);

keybinds = (
  {mod = [], key = "Escape", cmd = "./build/ttcli exit"},
  {mod = ["alt"], key = "Return", cmd = "kitty"},

  {mod = ["alt"], key = "Tab", cmd = "./build/ttcli window cycle"},
  {mod = ["alt"], key = "q", cmd = "./build/ttcli window kill"},

  {mod = ["alt"], key = "1", cmd = "./build/ttcli workspace switch main"},
  {mod = ["alt"], key = "2", cmd = "./build/ttcli workspace switch work"},
  {mod = ["alt"], key = "2", cmd = "./build/ttcli workspace switch fun"},
  {mod = ["alt", "shift"], key = "1", cmd = "./build/ttcli window move-to main"},
  {mod = ["alt", "shift"], key = "2", cmd = "./build/ttcli window move-to work"},
  {mod = ["alt", "shift"], key = "3", cmd = "./build/ttcli window move-to fun"},
);

background_color = (0.2, 0.2, 0.3);
```


### Configuration Options {#configuration-options}


#### autostart {#autostart}

Defines a list of applications to start automatically when the compositor launches.

Format: A list of strings, where each string is the command to launch an application.

```cfg
autostart = (
  "kitty",
  "nautilus",
);
```


#### workspaces {#workspaces}

Specifies the names of workspaces that will be available in the compositor. Each name in the list represents a workspace that can be switched to or configured independently.

Format: A list of strings, each representing a workspace name.

```cfg
workspaces = (
  "main",
  "work",
  "fun",
);
```


#### keybinds {#keybinds}

Defines keybindings for actions within the compositor, such as switching workspaces or launching applications. Each keybinding specifies a modifier (optional), a key, and a command to execute.

Format: A list of objects, each containing:

-   mod: A list of modifier keys (e.g., mod4 for the “Super” key). Leave empty for no modifier.
-   key: The key to bind (e.g., “1”). It’s important to capitalize the first letter of keys like “Escape”
-   cmd: The command to execute when the key combination is pressed, this can be any shell command.

<!--listend-->

```cfg
keybinds = (
  {mod = [], key = "Escape", cmd = "./build/ttcli exit"},
  {mod = ["alt"], key = "Return", cmd = "kitty"},
  {mod = ["alt"], key = "Tab", cmd = "./build/ttcli window cycle"},
);
```


#### background_color {#background-color}

Sets the background color of the compositor in RGB format, with values between 0 and 1.

Format: A list of three floating-point numbers, representing the RGB color channels.

```cfg
background_color = (0.2, 0.2, 0.3);  # A muted dark blue
```


## CLI usage {#cli-usage}

This page provides a comprehensive guide to turtile's Command Line Interface (CLI) commands.
The CLI lets you interact with and control turtile by issuing commands through a Unix socket.


### exit {#exit}

Description: Terminates the turtile compositor.

Usage: `ttcli exit`


### window {#window}


#### window list {#window-list}

Description: Lists all active windows with information on their ID, class, title, and associated workspace.

Usage: `ttcli window list`

Output format:

```json
[
  {
    "id": "window_id",
    "class": "app_id",
    "title": "window_title",
    "workspace": "workspace_name"
  }
]
```


#### window switch {#window-switch}

Description: Switches focus to the specified window by its ID.

Usage: `ttcli window switch <window_id>`

Arguments:
    `<window_id>` ID of the window to focus.


#### window cycle {#window-cycle}

Description: Cycles focus to the next window within the current workspace.

Usage: `ttcli window cycle`


#### window kill {#window-kill}

Description: Closes a window. Can close a specified window by ID or the currently focused window if no ID is given.

Usage: `ttcli window kill [<window_id>]`

Arguments:
    `[<window_id>]` (optional) ID of the window to close.


#### window move-to {#window-move-to}

Description: Moves a window to a specified workspace. Can target a specific window by ID or the currently focused window.

Usage: `ttcli window move-to <workspace_name> [<window_id>]`

Arguments:
    `<workspace_name>` Name of the destination workspace.
    `[<window_id>]` (optional) ID of the window to move.


#### window mtoggle {#window-mtoggle}

Description: Sets a window as the master in the current workspace. Can target a specific window by ID or otherwise the currently focused window.
If no window is specified and the current window is the next window in the stack will be set as the master instead.

Usage: `ttcli window mtoggle [<window_id>]`

Arguments:
    `[<window_id>]` (optional) ID of the window to set as master.


### workspace {#workspace}


#### workspace list {#workspace-list}

Description: Lists all available workspaces and their status (active/inactive).

Usage: `workspace list`

Output sample:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "workspace_name",
    "active": true
  }
]
```


#### workspace switch {#workspace-switch}

Description: Switches focus to a specified workspace.

Usage: `workspace switch <workspace_name>`

Arguments:
    `<workspace_name>` Name of the workspace to switch to.
