---
title: "Modes in Vim"
author: ["miguel"]
date: 2025-03-09T00:00:00+01:00
lastmod: 2025-11-16T00:00:00+01:00
tags: ["vim"]
draft: false
---

Links: [Vim]({{< relref "20250309132443-vim.md" >}})

Vim uses a Modal editing approach where keys can change it's function depending on the mode that you're in.
There are 4 major modes.


## Normal Mode {#normal-mode}

This is the default mode when you open the editor.
Each key in this mode represents a different command or function, they don't insert any text!


## Insert Mode {#insert-mode}

_Insert mode_ is very similar of what you would find on a regular editor, and to get into it you just need to press **i** while
in _normal mode_. Now you can type whatever you want, use backspace to delete and even use the arrow keys to move.

-   To exit _insert mode_ and go back to _normal_ you can press the **ESC** key
-   Another way to enter _insert mode_ is with pressing **a** in this case the cursor will be _after_ the character instead of _before_.
-   You could also use the **o** command to create a _new line_ at the same time you enter _insert mode_.

> [!tip] Power user tip
> You can rebind **Caps lock** to **ESC** to have it closer to the keyboard home row and switch between modes at light speed.


## Visual Mode {#visual-mode}

To enter _visual mode_ type **v** while in _normal mode_.
You can use all the movement commands, you'll see that the selection follows the cursor starting from where it was first.
Other than movement you can use some commands like **y** _yank_, **d** delete and **c** _change_ and those will be executed on the selection.

There are also two other variants of _visual mode_:


### Visual Line {#visual-line}

To enter _Visual Line mode_ the command is uppercase **V**, this selects the text divided in lines.
Notice that if you have line wrap activated you may see more than one line while it's only one real one, so vim will interpret it as such.


### Visual Block {#visual-block}

To enter _Visual Block_ the command is **Ctr-v**, this selects text in a block.
It's a great feature, as it allow you to select text vertically as well as horizontally!
You can also use **I** and **A** to insert at the beginning or end of the selection, this will act as a multicursor, inserting the text in all the lines you had selected.


## Command Mode {#command-mode}

To get into _Command Mode_ press **:**, you'll notice that you can now write in a line similar to what we do for searching, but when you press **Enter** whatever you wrote will be executed.

This are some of the commands that you'll want to use more often:

| command   | description                             |
|-----------|-----------------------------------------|
| `:help d` | show help for command "d"               |
| `:w`      | write file                              |
| `:w foo`  | write on file called "foo"              |
| `:q`      | quit vim                                |
| `:q!`     | quit vim without saving                 |
| `:wq`     | write file and quit vim                 |
| `:e foo`  | open file called "foo"                  |
| `:!ls`    | execute ls command on system shell      |
| `:r !ls`  | read output of ls command and insert it |


## Replace Mode {#replace-mode}

To get into _Replace Mode_ press **R**, you can exit it like any other with **Esc**
This is one of the simplest modes, you simply replace all the text starting from the cursor location as you write.
I personally rather use commands like **c** so that I know exactly what I'm replacing before hand, but this is also an option.
