---
title: "Search in Vim"
author: ["miguel"]
date: 2025-03-09T00:00:00+01:00
lastmod: 2025-11-16T00:00:00+01:00
tags: ["vim"]
draft: false
---

Links: [Vim]({{< relref "20250309132443-vim.md" >}})


## General Search {#general-search}

This is very similar to what you may be used to in other text editors and applications with **Ctr-f**. In vim we use **/**, you'll see that when you press it, a line appears at the bottom of the screen, where you can type the search.

If there is more than one match for your search and you want to see the other ones, after pressing **Enter** you can
move through them with **n** (forward)  and **N** (backwards).

Something nice about how the search function works in Vim is that you can move around and do your edits after
searching for something and as soon as you click **n** you'll be back at your last search.

If you want to search text before the cursor instead of after, you could use **?** instead of **/** everything else would work
the same but backwards.

> [!tip] Search current word
> To search for the word underneath the cursor you can use the shortcut **\*** or **#** to search backwards.


## Search next matching character {#search-next-matching-character}

A quick way to move inside of a line in Vim is to quickly search for the next matching character, this can be done with **t** and **f**, pressing the character you want to search right after the command (**fa** so search for "a").
**t** will place the cursor before the character, while **f** will place it on top.
We can also move to the previous and next matching character with **,** and **;** respectively.


##  {#d41d8c}

> [!info] Related post
> For search and replace check [Vim search and replace and global commands]({{< relref "20250309200635-vim_search_and_replace_and_global_commands.md" >}})
