---
title: "Vim macros"
author: ["miguel"]
date: 2025-03-09T00:00:00+01:00
lastmod: 2025-03-10T00:00:00+01:00
tags: ["vim"]
draft: false
---

Links: [Vim]({{< relref "20250309132443-vim.md" >}})

Macros are a little bit like an overpowered [_dot_ command]({{< relref "20250310183953-the_vim_dot_command.md" >}}), They allow us to record any number of commands and repeat them at will later.

To record a macro you need to press **q** followed by any letter, that letter will be where the macro will be recorded. Then you execute the serie of commands that you want to record and press **q** again.

To execute said macro you press **@** followed by the letter that you used before.
You can also repeat the last executed macro with **@@** as **.@** would only repeat the last command inside the macro.

> [!info] Macros and registers
> To learn more about how macros work check out [Alphabetic registers and macros]({{< relref "20250309193842-vim_registers#alphabetic-registers-and-macros" >}})


## Example {#example}

A very common example where I like to use macros is when editing a list of items, let's make a simple one to add ";" at the end of each line.

We are gonna use the register "a" but you could save this anywhere, so to start **qa** now to append ";" to the end of the line we could do `$a;<ESC>` but we can shorten **$a** as just **A** (for adding something at the beginning you could also use **I** instead of **0i**).
Now we want to be on the next line to make it easier to execute the macro again, so **j** and lastly **q** to finish the macro.
Adding all this together it would be `qaA;<ESC>jq` And to execute this you could do **@a**, maybe you have 10 lines to add a semicolon, so you could got to the first one and do **10@a**.

If you wanted to repeat this with every line in a file the fastest way to do that is with recursion, in this case with `qaA;<ESC>j@aq` the macro would call itself until there are no more lines.
Note that for recursion to work you need to save the macro in a clean register, to clean the register "a" you can execute **qaq**.
